https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5v5eBf2KwF8



The surface of ciliated protozoa, such as Paramecium cells, is covered with a dense array of cilia. Ciliary movements exhibit beautiful metachronal wave-like coordination where a constant phase difference is maintained between adjacent cilia.



A swimming sea urchin sperm cell (Lytechinus pictus) imaged using high-speed video microscopy to capture the fast (50 Hz) beat cycle of the flagellum and quantitative image analysis to track the cell head trajectory (blue) and the flagellar motion (red).



A 500 frames per second fluorescence video of E. coli with stained flagella, played back at 25 frames per second. These bacteria were grown according to the protocol in Turner et al., J. Bacteriol. 194(10) p.2437 (2012), and the strain (HCB1737) was kindly provided by Linda Turner. Only the helical flagella that propel the bacteria can be seen clearly, and these form bundles behind the cell, driven by rotary molecular motors embedded in the cell wall. The flagella in these cells grow to about 10 um long (some are still growing, or may have been broken while I was preparing the cells), and the total field of view is 110x100 um.



Thin, hair-like biological structures called cilia are tiny but mighty. Working together, cilia play essential roles in human health, such as sweeping debris from the lungs. This video shows artificial cilia-like structures moving in unison. Appeared in Biomedical Beat—August 18, 2011 [https://publications.nigms.nih.gov/bi...]. Credit: Zvonimir Dogic, Brandeis University.

Artificial cilia exhibit spontaneous beating

Cilia, tiny hair-like structures that perform feats such as clearing microscopic debris from the lungs and determining the correct location of organs during development, move in mysterious ways. Their beating motions are synchronized to produce metachronal waves, similar in appearance to “the wave” created in large arenas when audience members use their hands to produce a pattern of movement around the entire stadium.

Due to the importance of ciliary functions for health, there is great interest in understanding the mechanism that controls the cilias’ beating patterns. But learning exactly how cilia movement is coordinated has been challenging.

That may be beginning to change as a result of the creation, by a team of Brandeis researchers, of artificial cilia-like structures that dramatically offers a new approach for cilia study.

In a recent paper published in the journal Science, Associate Professor of Physics Zvonimir Dogic and colleagues present the first example of a simple microscopic system that self-organizes to produce cilia-like beating patterns. 

“We’ve shown that there is a new approach toward studying the beating,” says Dogic. “Instead of deconstructing the fully functioning structure, we can start building complexity from the ground up.”

The complexity of these structures presents a major challenge as each cilium contains more than 600 different proteins.  For this reason, most previous studies of cilia have employed a top-down approach, attempting to study the beating mechanism by deconstructing the fully functioning structures through the systematic elimination of individual components.
